ADR-040: Storage and SMT State Commitments (#8430)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-040-storage-and-smt-state-commitments.md

# ADR 040: Storage and SMT State Commitments

## Changelog

- 2020-01-15: Draft

## Status

DRAFT Not Implemented

## Abstract

> Sparse Merke Tree (SMT) is a version of a Merkle Tree with various storage and performance optimizations. This ADR defines a separation of state commitments from data storage and the SDK transition from IAVL to SMT.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this shouldn't in fact be two ADRs instead? One for separating storage and commitments and one about the SMT.

Author: I was also thinking about it. But they are highly related - one cannot be done without other. Hence, I'm proposing here a general design and leave a space for future ADR for RDMS which will introduce SDK breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: Well we could separate the two with IAVL right? We don't need SMT for that AFAIK...

Author: @aaronc, we could describe here only SMT, but it will only a half backed idea without a working solution:
* keeping IAVL (in it's current implementation) with anything else doesn't make sense because we double the data.
* the main value proposition here is to not store objects in SMT (we store only hashes).

Do you have something else in mind?

In the current design, IAVL is used for both data storage and as a Merkle Tree for state commitments. IAVL is meant to be a standalone Merkelized key/value database, however it's using a KV DB engine to store all tree nodes. So, each node is stored in a separate record in the KV DB. This causes many inefficiencies and problems:

+ Each object select requires a tree traversal from the root
+ Each edge traversal requires a DB query (nodes are not stored in a memory)
+ Creating snapshots is [expensive](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/7215#issuecomment-684804950). It takes about 30 seconds to export less than 100 MB of state (as of March 2020).
+ Updates in IAVL may trigger tree reorganization and possible O(log(n)) hashes re-computation, which can become a CPU bottleneck.
+ The leaf structure is pretty expensive: it contains the `(key, value)` pair, additional metadata such as height, version. The entire node is hashed, and that hash is used as the key in the underlying database, [ref](https://github.com/cosmos/iavl/blob/master/docs/node/node.md
).

> Moreover, the IAVL project lacks a support and we already see better, well adapted alternatives. Instead of optimizing the IAVL, we are looking in another solutions for both storage and state commitments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, the IAVL project lacks support and a maintainer and we already see better and well-established alternatives. Instead of optimizing the IAVL, we are looking into other solutions for both storage and state commitments.
```

Author: Regen team is taking over the IAVL maintenance, but frankly speaking it's not our priority ;)

## Decision

> We propose separate the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with LazyLedger SMT.

Reviewer: IMO, @musalbas SMT implementation should be linked here (https://github.com/lazyledger/smt).

Author: OK, will add a link.

### Decouple state commitment from storage

> Separation of storage and SMT will allow a specialization in terms of various optimization patterns.

Reviewer: This is a bit too vague. 
```suggestion
Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow to optimize the different components according to their usage and access patterns.
```

> SMT will use it's own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SMT will use its own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf.
```

For data access we propose 2 additional KV buckets:
1. B1: `key → value`: the principal object storage, used by a state machine, behind the SDK `KVStore` interface.
2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: B2 -> B1) having a only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.
3. we could use more buckets to optimize the app usage if needed.

> Above, we propose to use KV DB. However, for state machine we could use RDBMS, which we discuss below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Above, we propose to use KV DB. However, for the state machine, we could use an RDBMS, which we discuss below.
```

### Requirements

State Storage requirements:
+ range queries
+ quick (key, value) access
+ creating a snapshot

State Commitment requirements:
+ fast updates
+ path length should be short
+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

TODO:
+ describe pruning and version management

### Snapshots

> One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and fast sync. Currently this feature is implemented through IAVL.

Reviewer 3: I can't see a way to use snapshots/versions with BoltDB API. BoltDB provides "snapshot isolation", but do not support explicit creation/usage of snapshots.

Reviewer: That's a good point. We should double-check that the dbs mentioned below actually provide the desired snapshotting mechanism.

Author: Thanks for checking. I'm not completely sure. We can check with the hashicorp team. I found this:
+ "If a long running read transaction (for example, a snapshot transaction) is needed, you might want to set DB.InitialMmapSize to a large enough value to avoid potential blocking of write transaction. " [source](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/boltdb/bolt#DB.Begin)
+ This _sovled_ issue could be relevant, because waypoint is using boltDB and it support snapshots: https://github.com/hashicorp/waypoint/issues/682

Author: I'm not sure if we should spend a time here to discuss the backend. I mean - we need to verify the proposals, but we should have a separate discussion about the the "recommended" DB backend. 
So, what do you think about shifting the snapshot functionality to DB?

Reviewer 4: I'm wondering if using database snapshots to access old state roots is overkill, or even necessary for SMT.

By default, you can already access the old state roots in the LazyLedger SMT implementation, because the tree isn't garbage collected currently. Once garbage collection is added, it could be configured to only garbage collect state roots older than a certain version, which would be equivalent to snapshots, no?

Reviewer 3: > "If a long running read transaction (for example, a snapshot transaction) is needed, you might want to set DB.InitialMmapSize to a large enough value to avoid potential blocking of write transaction. " 

I saw this before, and I'm pretty sure it's about [app-level logic](https://github.com/hashicorp/waypoint/blob/main/internal/server/singleprocess/state/snapshot.go#L51) executing app-level transaction (iteration over entire KV-store) to generate app-level snapshots. 

> I'm wondering if using database snapshots to access old state roots is overkill, or even necessary for SMT.

I think we discuss snapshots because of the "storage" part of proposal not "state commitment" part. For SMT, I also don't see a reason to use DB-level snapshots.

> So, what do you think about shifting the snapshot functionality to DB?

I agree that it is more than reasonable to use capabilities of DB to ensure we can access&manage previous versions of state.

Author: Good point. 
We need to have old versions of SMT for snapshots. So, I see two options here:
1. Whenever we schedule a snapshot, we do it in a same way as for state snapshots: using DB builtin feature. If we need to create a new node, and orphan some other node, then we immediately remove orphan nodes. So, effectively, we won't have old roots because we will remove them immediately.
2. Extend the current LL SMT and add pruning.

PS: I assume in your current implementation, you don't update nodes - instead you create a new one, right? This allows you to keep all old versions. Why do you do that, instead of updating nodes?

Reviewer 4: We have to add pruning to LL SMT anyway, otherwise the state will keep growing.

>PS: I assume in your current implementation, you don't update nodes - instead you create a new one, right? This allows you to keep all old versions. Why do you do that, instead of updating nodes?

Nodes are stored in a key => value store where the key is a hash of the node, and the value is the preimage of the hash. Assuming the hashes are collision resistant, you can't "update" a node since the tree is immutable - you can only "create" a new tree with a new root.

Author: But you have a path to the updated Leaf, so you can use it to remove old nodes:
1. Given `key`, we traverse the tree with `path=hash(key)`
2. While going down to a node, we can remember all nodes on the path
3. When going back and updating (or creating new ones) internal nodes, we can remove old node - we use the path we constructed in the step `2.`

Many underlying DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality and limit the supported DB engines to ones which support snapshots (Badger, RocksDB, BoltDB)

### Pruning

> TODO: discuss state storage pruning requirements

Reviewer: @zmanian and others suggested to only persisting state every N blocks (or versions?) instead of going through the IO expensive op of actually deleting it according to some pruning-logic / config.

Author: Please see updated version.

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

This ADR doesn't introduce any SDK level API changes.

We change a storage layout, so storage migration and a blockchain reboot is required.

### Positive

+ Decoupling state from state commitment introduce better engineering opportunities for further optimizations and better storage patterns.
+ Performance improvements.

> + Joining SMT based camp which has wider and proven adoption than IAVL.

Reviewer: You could substantiate that claim by linking to a few projects that use sparse Merkle trees (libra, trillian,...)

Author: I have them in my report. Will add them here as well. Thanks for suggestion.

### Negative

+ Storage migration

### Neutral

+ Deprecating IAVL, which is one of the core proposals of Cosmos Whitepaper.

## Further Discussions

### RDBMS

Use of RDBMS instead of simple KV store for state. Use of RDBMS will require an SDK API breaking change (`KVStore` interface), will allow better data extraction and indexing solutions. Instead of saving an object as a single blob of bytes, we could save it as record in a table in the state storage layer, and as a `hash(key, protobuf(object))` in the SMT as outlined above. To verify that an object registered in RDBMS is same as the one committed to SMT, one will need to load it from RDBMS, marshal using protobuf, hash and do SMT search.

> ## References

Reviewer: Suggested other refs:
- https://github.com/lazyledger/smt
- https://developers.diem.com/papers/jellyfish-merkle-tree/2021-01-14.pdf
- https://github.com/google/trillian/blob/master/docs/papers/RevocationTransparency.pdf
- https://github.com/google/trillian/blob/master/docs/papers/VerifiableDataStructures.pdf

Author: Yes, thanks.

+ fast updates
+ path length should be short
+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots

One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and fast sync. Currently this feature is implemented through IAVL.
Many underlying DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality and limit the supported DB engines to ones which support snapshots (Badger, RocksDB, BoltDB) using a _copy on write_ mechanism.

### Pruning

At minimum SC doesn't need to keep old versions. However we need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if transaction fails. This can be done in the following way:dDuring transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Only when we commit on a root store, all changes are written to the the SMT.

> We can use the same approach for SM Storage. However, we need to keep few past versions (configurable by user, eg: 10 past versions every 100 blocks) in a form of snapshot. Ideally we would like to shift that functionality to a DB engine itself.

Reviewer 3: Just for clarification: here, by snapshot you mean "db-level snapshot", not snapshot from `./snapshots` package?

Author: They are related (`/snapshot` uses db-snapshot functionality), I moved that paragraph to "snapshots" section.

State Commitment requirements:
+ fast updates
+ path length should be short
+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots

One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and fast sync delivered in the `/snapshot` package. Currently this feature is implemented through IAVL.
Many underlying DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality and limit the supported DB engines to ones which support snapshots (Badger, RocksDB, ...) using a _copy on write_ mechanism (we can't create a full copy - it would be too big).

The number of snapshots should be configurable by user (eg: 10 past versions - one every 100 blocks).

Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by DB. If DB allows to configure max number of snapshots, then we are done. Otherwise, we need to hook this mechanism into `EndBlocker`.

### Versioning

> At minimum SC doesn't need to keep old versions. However we need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if transaction fails. This can be done in the following way:dDuring transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Only when we commit on a root store, all changes are written to the the SMT.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At minimum SC doesn't need to keep old versions. However we need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if transaction fails. This can be done in the following way: during transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Only when we commit on a root store, all changes are written to the the SMT.
```

+ The leaf structure is pretty expensive: it contains the `(key, value)` pair, additional metadata such as height, version. The entire node is hashed, and that hash is used as the key in the underlying database, [ref](https://github.com/cosmos/iavl/blob/master/docs/node/node.md
).

Moreover, the IAVL project lacks support and a maintainer and we already see better and well-established alternatives. Instead of optimizing the IAVL, we are looking into other solutions for both storage and state commitments.

## Decision

We propose separate the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with [LazyLedger SMT](https://github.com/lazyledger/smt). LazyLedger SMT is based on Diem (called jellyfish) design [*] - it uses a compute-optimised SMT by replacing subtrees with only default values with a single node (same approach is used by Ethereum2 as  well).

### Decouple state commitment from storage

Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow to optimize the different components according to their usage and access patterns.

> SMT will use it's own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf.

Reviewer 5: Is it possible for us to apply these changes to the IAVL implementation which would remove the state duplication from the implementation?

Reviewer 6: Out of scope of the refactor. It can be done after this upgrade has been completed and if someone asks for it, otherwise we would look at archiving IAVL

Author: Agree with @marbar3778 . IAVL has other drawbacks, and no point to update it.

+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots

One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and fast sync delivered in the `/snapshot` package. Currently this feature is implemented through IAVL.
Many underlying DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality and limit the supported DB engines to ones which support snapshots (Badger, RocksDB, ...) using a _copy on write_ mechanism (we can't create a full copy - it would be too big).

New snapshot will be created in every `EndBlocker`. The number of snapshots should be configurable by user (eg: 100 past blocks and one snapshot every 100 blocks for past 2000 blocks).

Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by DB. If DB allows to configure max number of snapshots, then we are done. Otherwise, we need to hook this mechanism into `EndBlocker`.

### Versioning

> At minimum SC doesn't need to keep old versions. However we need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if transaction fails. This can be done in the following way: during transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Only when we commit on a root store, all changes are written to the the SMT.

Reviewer 7: How do we return proofs for store keys at older heights?

Author: you would need to access the data using a snapshot. Archival nodes would keep all snapshots (all versions).

We can use the same approach for SM Storage.

#### Accessing old, committed state versions

One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done with `abci.Query` structure.  The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by key `K` at a version committed in block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.Query` is configurable. Moreover, SDK could provide a way to directly access the state. However, a state machines shouldn't do that - since the number of snapshots is configurable, it would lead to a not deterministic execution.

> We validated the Snapshot mechanism for querying old state versions.

Reviewer 7: How was this validated - any further reading/links?

Author: We tested it. You can read more about it here: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/8297#discussioncomment-342359

Many underlying DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality and limit the supported DB engines to ones which support snapshots (Badger, RocksDB, ...) using a _copy on write_ mechanism (we can't create a full copy - it would be too big).

The number of snapshots should be configurable by user (eg: 10 past versions - one every 100 blocks).

Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by DB. If DB allows to configure max number of snapshots, then we are done. Otherwise, we need to hook this mechanism into `EndBlocker`.

### Versioning

At minimum SC doesn't need to keep old versions. However we need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if transaction fails. This can be done in the following way: during transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Only when we commit on a root store, all changes are written to the the SMT.

We can use the same approach for SM Storage.

#### Accessing old, committed state versions

> ABCI interface requires a support for querying data in past versions. The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by key `K` at a version committed in block height `H`). The query is defined in the `abci.Query` structure. The number of old versions we support for `abci.Query` is configurable.

Reviewer 6: Dont think it makes sense to say ABCI requires this. Ideally the app would not need to use tendermint as a global mutex for performance benefits. 

This is a requirement for everything because users don't only care about current state.

Author: Correct. How about this wording:

_One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through `abci.Query`....._

Reviewer 6: sounds good to me. Should we state something about trying to remove the using tendermint for this as future work?

Author: Yes  - good idea. For state storage we should be able to use SDK directly.

TODO: Verify if we can use same mechanism as for snapshots (offloading it to DB engine):
+ what's DB storage impact - are snapshots expensive?

If this won't work, then we will integrate other mechanism discussed in https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/8297#discussioncomment-309918.
Pruning custom versions could be done using _mark and sweep GC_: once per defined period, a GC will start, mark old objects and prune them. This will require encoding a version mechanism in a KV store.

### Managing versions and pruning

> Number of historical versions for `abci.Query` and snapshots for fast sync is part of a node configuration, not a chain configuration.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Number of historical versions for `abci.Query` and snapshots for state sync is part of a node configuration, not a chain configuration.
```

Same comment as above. 

You mean state sync here. Fast sync doesn't need anything from the app.

Author: By fast sync I mean a sync which uses a snapshot (as opposed to "redoing" the blockchain).

Reviewer 6: Yes, it may be easier to keep with common nomenclature. I dont have a preference, you can leave as is if youd like

NOTE: `Commit` must be called exactly once per block. Otherwise we risk going out of sync for the version number and block height.

TODO: It seams we don't need to update the `MultiStore` interface - it encapsulates a `Commiter` interface, which has the `Commit`, `SetPruning`, `GetPruning` functions. However, we may consider splitting that interface into `Committer` and `PrunningCommiter` - only the multiroot should implement `PrunningCommiter`.

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

This ADR doesn't introduce any SDK level API changes.

We change a storage layout, so storage migration and a blockchain reboot is required.

### Positive

+ Decoupling state from state commitment introduce better engineering opportunities for further optimizations and better storage patterns.
+ Performance improvements.
+ Joining SMT based camp which has wider and proven adoption than IAVL. Example projects which decided on SMT: Ethereum2, Diem (Libra), Trillan, Tezos, LazyLedger.

### Negative

+ Storage migration
+ LL SMT doesn't support pruning - we will need to add and test that functionality.

### Neutral

> + Deprecating IAVL, which is one of the core proposals of Cosmos Whitepaper.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
+ Deprecating IAVL
```
Would add it to positive 😜

Author: Isn't this important that we are removing a core component from the Cosmos Whitepaper?

Reviewer 6: more of a joke, we can resolve

+ The leaf structure is pretty expensive: it contains the `(key, value)` pair, additional metadata such as height, version. The entire node is hashed, and that hash is used as the key in the underlying database, [ref](https://github.com/cosmos/iavl/blob/master/docs/node/node.md
).

Moreover, the IAVL project lacks support and a maintainer and we already see better and well-established alternatives. Instead of optimizing the IAVL, we are looking into other solutions for both storage and state commitments.

## Decision

We propose separate the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with [LazyLedger SMT](https://github.com/lazyledger/smt). LazyLedger SMT is based on Diem (called jellyfish) design [*] - it uses a compute-optimised SMT by replacing subtrees with only default values with a single node (same approach is used by Ethereum2 as  well).

### Decouple state commitment from storage

Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow to optimize the different components according to their usage and access patterns.

> SMT will use it's own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf.

Reviewer 2: It would be really great to understand better why we're storing `hash(key, value)` in the leaf.

Reviewer 2: Also, in the design I put forth in #9158 and #9156, I was thinking we might store `hash(table_name, primary_key)` as the key and `hash(proto_json(value))` as the value. `value` in this case actually includes the primary key but not the table name. Is there a way we can just expose a generic merkle `KVStore` and just allow modules to choose what they do and don't put in the Merkle store?

Author: 1. We don't have a concept of `table_name` on this level. And we don't need it. We don't have things like _primary key_ neither. We operate on Key-Value level. 
2. We are hashing a key to distribute evenly the keys. in the tree.
3. Value is already a binary, so `proto_json` doesn't make sense here. The storage doesn't know anything about the value structure - it's just a sequence of bytes.

> Is there a way we can just expose a generic merkle KVStore and just allow modules to choose what they do and don't put in the Merkle store?

This is what we are doing. Modules don't even know if there is a merkle tree, and what goes into the merkle tree. Modules only use a generic KVStore interface as it's done today (with caching and key prefixing).

Author: > why we're storing hash(key, value) in the leaf.

We want to bind a `(key-value)` pair from the state storage into the sate commitment. Since we don't know if key is part of a value, we just hash both. It's fast. I will add this explanation to the document.

Reviewer 2: I'm more or less expressing my desire for two methods on `sdk.Context`: one would return a merkle store directly and the other would return a regular non-merklized KV store. If I'm thinking about what would make proofs easy for clients, I would structure the merklized data using a well-defined specification AND not merklize secondary indexes.

The reason I mention proto JSON is because for `SIGN_MODE_TEXTUAL` clients will need an algorithm to "canonicalize" proto3 JSON. Clients do not have an algorithm for canonicalizing proto binary, modules do not store proto binary in canonical form, and there haven't really been substantive discussions about changing this. So it is not so easy for clients to verify a proof it they don't have the exact binary that is represented in the KV store which is not well-defined and probably shouldn't be a detail that is exposed to clients. So I'm proposing that the merklized data follow some well-defined spec maybe using textual formats rather than relying on what goes into the KV store.

Rather than specifying this at the framework level, my solution would be for `sdk.Context` to all direct access to the merkle tree and non-merklized KV store separately. Maybe this is out of scope for this ADR but I would like us to consider this and as I recall we discussed something like this in the past.

Author: > one would return a merkle store directly and the other would return a regular non-merklized KV store.

This ADR is not about introducing a storage for data not being part of the state commitment. The whole mechanism here is for efficiently commit and access the data. The reason we have 2 data store (SS and SC) under the hood is for efficiency and was inspired by turbo geth. In other words, in this design we have only one external store, which commits and queries committed data. Under the hood, it uses 2 DBs for efficiency.

Support storage (eg [module off chain store](https://github.com/regen-network/regen-ledger/issues/304)) or indexers are out of the scope and are not part of the committed state. We could implement an extension store which will use the state commit store (this ADR) in some way (eg: kind of a subtree, or polynomial commitment).

Author: > The reason I mention proto JSON is because for SIGN_MODE_TEXTUAL

It's not clear to me why storage should deal with additional logic (eg what's the data type), rather then bytes. If client want's to save data using `SIGN_MODE_TEXTUAL`, then it will use `proto_json`, or wrap the bytes with some hint, eg: `{data: []byte, decoder: DecoderEnum}` or just know it from the context (the client know what it is saving under each key, so should be able to decide if it needs to recode data: `read -> deserialize(&struct) -> serialize_text_mode(&struct)`.

Author: I will add notes about off-chain store to _Further Discussion_ section.

For data access we propose 2 additional KV buckets:
1. B1: `key → value`: the principal object storage, used by a state machine, behind the SDK `KVStore` interface: provides direct access by key and allows prefix iteration (KV DB backend must support it).

> 2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: B2 -> B1) having a only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.

Reviewer 2: What's the need for the reverse index? I'm just wondering what the use case is. I'm imagining mostly we will have `(key, value)` already from a non-proof query and just want to use SMT to get the proof in which case we don't need the reverse index.

Author: If we don't have it then you will always need to know a `key` and all proofs will need to include key (so will potentially save space in transactions). I looked at `ics23` - both key and value is included in `ics23` proofs. So maybe we can mark it as optional. I added it here for integrity.

+ Each object select requires a tree traversal from the root
+ Each edge traversal requires a DB query (nodes are not stored in a memory)
+ Creating snapshots is [expensive](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/7215#issuecomment-684804950). It takes about 30 seconds to export less than 100 MB of state (as of March 2020).
+ Updates in IAVL may trigger tree reorganization and possible O(log(n)) hashes re-computation, which can become a CPU bottleneck.
+ The leaf structure is pretty expensive: it contains the `(key, value)` pair, additional metadata such as height, version. The entire node is hashed, and that hash is used as the key in the underlying database, [ref](https://github.com/cosmos/iavl/blob/master/docs/node/node.md
).

Moreover, the IAVL project lacks support and a maintainer and we already see better and well-established alternatives. Instead of optimizing the IAVL, we are looking into other solutions for both storage and state commitments.

## Decision

> We propose separate the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with [LazyLedger SMT](https://github.com/lazyledger/smt). LazyLedger SMT is based on Diem (called jellyfish) design [*] - it uses a compute-optimised SMT by replacing subtrees with only default values with a single node (same approach is used by Ethereum2 as  well).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We propose separating the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with [LazyLedger SMT](https://github.com/lazyledger/smt). LazyLedger SMT is based on Diem (called jellyfish) design [*] - it uses a compute-optimised SMT by replacing subtrees with only default values with a single node (same approach is used by Ethereum2 as  well).
```

The storage model presented here doesn't deal with data structure nor serialization. It's a Key-Value database, where both key and value are binaries. The storage user is responsible for data serialization.

### Decouple state commitment from storage

> Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow to optimize the different components according to their usage and access patterns.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow the optimization of different components according to their usage and access patterns.
```

> SMT will use it's own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path (needed to evenly distribute keys in the tree) and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf (to bind the (key, value) pair stored in the `SS`). Since we don't know a structure of a value (in particular if it contains the key) we hash both the key and the value in the `SC` leaf.

Reviewer 6: nit: I don't follow this first sentence. Is it using its own storage or the same?

Reviewer 8: Yeah I don't follow this. It's hard to understand and there's a few punctuation errors. I would suggest re-wording this to make the points more clear and easy to follow.

> For data access we propose 2 additional KV buckets:

Reviewer 6: What is a KV bucket here? this may be nomenclature I am not familiar with

Reviewer 6: could you post this link with a small explainer. The current explainer doesn't explain, it just throws a sentence into the mix

1. B1: `key → value`: the principal object storage, used by a state machine, behind the SDK `KVStore` interface: provides direct access by key and allows prefix iteration (KV DB backend must support it).
2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: SMT → B2 → B1) having only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.
3. we could use more buckets to optimize the app usage if needed.

> Above, we propose to use KV DB. However, for the state machine, we could use an RDBMS, which we discuss below.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Above, we propose to use KV DB. However, for the state machine, we could use an RDBMS, which we discuss below.
```

### Requirements

State Storage requirements:
+ range queries
+ quick (key, value) access
+ creating a snapshot
+ prunning (garbage collection)

State Commitment requirements:
+ fast updates
+ tree path should be short
+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots for storage sync and versioning

> One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and fast sync delivered in the `/snapshot` package. This feature is implemented in SDK and requires a storage support. Currently the only supported is IAVL.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and state sync delivered in the `/snapshot` package. This feature is implemented in SDK and requires a storage support. Currently the only supported is IAVL.
```

please use the common nomenclature, changing terms, as we have seen, is causing issues.

Some DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality for the state sync and versioning (described below). It will the supported DB engines to ones which efficiently implement snapshots. In a final section we will discuss evaluated DBs.

New snapshot will be created in every `EndBlocker`. The `rootmulti.Store` keeps track of the version number and implements the `MultiStore` interface. `MultiStore` encapsulates a `Commiter` interface, which has the `Commit`, `SetPruning`, `GetPruning` functions which will be used for creating and removing snapshots. The `Store.Commit` function increments the version on each call, and checks if it needs to remove old versions. We will need to update the SMT interface to implement the `Commiter` interface.
NOTE: `Commit` must be called exactly once per block. Otherwise we risk going out of sync for the version number and block height.
NOTE: For the SDK storage, we may consider splitting that interface into `Committer` and `PrunningCommiter` - only the multiroot should implement `PrunningCommiter` (cache and prefix store don't need pruning).

> Number of historical versions (snapshots) for `abci.Query` and fast sync is part of a node configuration, not a chain configuration. A configuration should allow to specify number of past blocks and number of past blocks modulo some number (eg: 100 past blocks and one snapshot every 100 blocks for past 2000 blocks). Archival nodes can keep all snapshots.

Reviewer 6: nit: this section reads weird. Could it be reworded. 

Also historical versions are not only needed for abci.Query, they are aslo generally needed in the sdk

Reviewer 6: When a user wants to query previous state.. Many users query through the sdk currently. The abci.query is just there if someone wants to use it or for the app to query through it.

> Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by DB. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT will create a new one without removing the old one. Since we are using a snapshot for each block, we must update the mechanism and immediately remove an orphaned from the storage. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records which should be available for past versions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by the database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT will create a new one without removing the old one. Since we are snapshoting each block, we update the mechanism and immediately remove an orphaned from the storage. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records which should be available for past versions.
```

what is an orphan here?

> To manage the active snapshots we will either us a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or will remove snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height.

Reviewer 6: This seems a bit confusing to me. Pruning of Snapshots and pruning of application states, currently, are two separate configurable parameters. Are we merging these two? If so can it worded this way. 

What is the impact to disk size with this design?

Reviewer 6: I am talking about how we currently prune application states or versions. You are talking about pruning versions or snapshots which are used for versions. This is application state pruning.

Author: I'm not sure I understand your concern. ADR-40 is not about pruning application state. Old SS (state storage) versions (a version of  the whole state) are covered by snapshots. If we want to remove an old version we remove a snapshot.

#### Accessing old state versions

> One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through `abci.Query` structure.  The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by a key `K` at block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.Query` is configurable. Accessing an old state is done by using available snapshots.

Reviewer 6: This isn't specific to abci.Query. Might make more sense to reword in the sense of querying.

Author: How they do it now? Are you talking about a new feature?

> `abci.Query` doesn't need old state of `SC`. So, for efficiency, we should keep `SC` and `SS` in different databases (however using the same DB engine). We will only create snapshots for

Reviewer 6: How will you generate the proof if you don't have the commitment?

Reviewer 6: Oh, I think its answered, this may benefit from some rewording. Also touching on how proofs for old data will work would be useful

> Moreover, SDK could provide a way to directly access the state. However, a state machines shouldn't do that - since the number of snapshots is configurable, it would lead to a not deterministic execution.

Reviewer 6: Is pruning within the unbonding window a worry?

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Moreover, SDK could provide a way to directly access the state. However, a state machines shouldn't do that - since the number of snapshots is configurable, it would lead to a nondeterministic execution.
```

> We positively validated a snapshot mechanism for querying old state with regards to the database we evaluated.

Reviewer 6: is there any way we could link to this validation?

Author: > is there any way we could link to this validation?

All of it is in the SDK discussion thread, linked in _References_ section. I will link it here as well.

>  Which database was evaluated?

This is written in _Evaluated KV Databases_ section

### Rollbacks

> We need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if transaction fails. This can be done in the following way: during transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Once we finish the block processing, in the `Endblocker`,  we commit a root store - at that time, all changes are written to the SMT and to the `SS` and a snapshot is created.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if a transaction fails. This can be done in the following way: during transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Once we finish the block processing, in the `Endblocker`,  we commit a root store - at that time, all changes are written to the SMT and to the `SS` and a snapshot is created.
```

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

This ADR doesn't introduce any SDK level API changes.

> We change a storage layout, so storage migration and a blockchain reboot is required.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We change the storage layout of the state machine, a storage migration and a network upgrade is required.
```

### Negative

+ Storage migration
+ LL SMT doesn't support pruning - we will need to add and test that functionality.

### Neutral

+ Deprecating IAVL, which is one of the core proposals of Cosmos Whitepaper.

## Alternative designs.

Most of the alternative designs were evaluated in [state commitments and storage report](https://paper.dropbox.com/published/State-commitments-and-storage-review--BDvA1MLwRtOx55KRihJ5xxLbBw-KeEB7eOd11pNrZvVtqUgL3h).

Ethereum research published [Verkle Tire](https://notes.ethereum.org/_N1mutVERDKtqGIEYc-Flw#fnref1) - an idea of combining polynomial commitments with merkle tree in order to reduce the tree height. This concept has a very good potential, but we think it's too early to implement it. The current, SMT based design could be easily updated to the Verkle Tire once other research implement all necessary libraries. The main advantage of the design described in this ADR is the separation of state commitments from the data storage and designing a more powerful interface.

## Further Discussions

### Evaluated KV Databases

> We verified existing databases KV databases for evaluating snapshot support. The following DBs provide efficient snapshot mechanism: Badger, RocksDB, [Pebbe](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble). DB which don't provide such support or are not production ready: boltdb, leveldb, goleveldb, membdb, lmdb.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We verified existing databases KV databases for evaluating snapshot support. The following databases provide efficient snapshot mechanism: Badger, RocksDB, [Pebble](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble). Databases which don't provide such support or are not production ready: boltdb, leveldb, goleveldb, membdb, lmdb.
```

2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: SMT → B2 → B1) having a only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.
3. we could use more buckets to optimize the app usage if needed.

Above, we propose to use KV DB. However, for the state machine, we could use an RDBMS, which we discuss below.

### Requirements

State Storage requirements:
+ range queries
+ quick (key, value) access
+ creating a snapshot
+ prunning (garbage collection)

State Commitment requirements:
+ fast updates
+ tree path should be short
+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots for storage sync and versioning

> s

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

# ADR 040: Storage and SMT State Commitments

## Changelog

- 2020-01-15: Draft

## Status

DRAFT Not Implemented

## Abstract

> Sparse Merke Tree (SMT) is a version of a Merkle Tree with various storage and performance optimizations. This ADR defines a separation of state commitments from data storage and the SDK transition from IAVL to SMT.

Reviewer 8: I would add a link to SMT just so folks can navigate towards something they can get more preliminary information on before continuing.

Author: There is a link in _References_ section. But I will add a link to more general description here as well.

## Context

> Currently, Cosmos SDK uses IAVL for both state commitments and data storage.

Reviewer 8: I would define what state commitments are and how it differs from data storage. It can be concise.

Author: Isn't it self explaining? State commitment is a commitment to a state. I can add a link to explain more general commitment schemes.

> IAVL has effectively become an orphaned project within the Cosmos ecosystem and it's proven to be an inefficient state commitment.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
IAVL has effectively become an orphaned project within the Cosmos ecosystem and it's proven to be an inefficient state commitment data structure.
```

In the current design, IAVL is used for both data storage and as a Merkle Tree for state commitments. IAVL is meant to be a standalone Merkelized key/value database, however it's using a KV DB engine to store all tree nodes. So, each node is stored in a separate record in the KV DB. This causes many inefficiencies and problems:

+ Each object select requires a tree traversal from the root

> + Each edge traversal requires a DB query (nodes are not stored in a memory)

Reviewer 8: Are you sure about this?

Author: when traversing, we a tree we are always doing a DB query.  However subsequent queries are cached on SDK level, not the IAVL level. I can add that calcification.

+ Creating snapshots is [expensive](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/issues/7215#issuecomment-684804950). It takes about 30 seconds to export less than 100 MB of state (as of March 2020).
+ Updates in IAVL may trigger tree reorganization and possible O(log(n)) hashes re-computation, which can become a CPU bottleneck.

> + The leaf structure is pretty expensive: it contains the `(key, value)` pair, additional metadata such as height, version. The entire node is hashed, and that hash is used as the key in the underlying database, [ref](https://github.com/cosmos/iavl/blob/master/docs/node/node.md

Reviewer 8: Can you please elaborate on why it's "expensive".

Author: It contains lot of data, which is not needed in the new structure. We don't really need the metadata in the new structure.

).

Moreover, the IAVL project lacks support and a maintainer and we already see better and well-established alternatives. Instead of optimizing the IAVL, we are looking into other solutions for both storage and state commitments.

## Decision

> We propose to separate the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with [LazyLedgers' SMT](https://github.com/lazyledger/smt). LazyLedger SMT is based on Diem (called jellyfish) design [*] - it uses a compute-optimised SMT by replacing subtrees with only default values with a single node (same approach is used by Ethereum2 as  well).

Reviewer 8: Out of curiosity, what are the core differences between LL's SMT, Diem's and Eth2's?

Reviewer 9: Unlike Diem's SMT, LL's:
- implements compact proofs
- Uuses more standardized placeholders and domain separators (e.g. Diem uses [this hash](https://github.com/diem/diem/blob/5d8dc68ddf29a19dfaba4c12da414c9b8e4db094/crypto/crypto/src/hash.rs#L619-L620) for the SMT default, LL uses `sha256(0b)`)
- is otherwise _logically_ the same

### Decouple state commitment from storage

Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow the optimization of different components according to their usage and access patterns.

SMT will use it's own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path (needed to evenly distribute keys in the tree) and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf (to bind the (key, value) pair stored in the `SS`). Since we don't know a structure of a value (in particular if it contains the key) we hash both the key and the value in the `SC` leaf.

For data access we propose 2 additional KV buckets (namespaces for the key-value pairs, sometimes called [column family](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Terminology)):
1. B1: `key → value`: the principal object storage, used by a state machine, behind the SDK `KVStore` interface: provides direct access by key and allows prefix iteration (KV DB backend must support it).

> 2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: SMT → B2 → B1) having only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.

Reviewer 8: I don't follow this.

Author: You can't get a data using SMT data. SMT only stores hashes. 
So, if you read a value from SMT, and you want to  get data you need to recover the key.

Reviewer 8: So sort of like an inverted index then. Can you rewrite this sentence like you just explained to make it clearer please?

Author: updated

+ tree path should be short
+ creating a snapshot
+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots for storage sync and versioning

One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and state sync delivered in the `/snapshot` package. This feature is implemented in SDK and requires storage support. Currently IAVL is the only supported backend.

Database snapshot is a view of DB state at a certain time or transaction. It's not a full copy of a database (it would be too big), usually a snapshot mechanism is based on a _copy on write_ and it allows to efficiently deliver DB state at a certain stage.
Some DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality for the state sync and versioning (described below). It will the supported DB engines to ones which efficiently implement snapshots. In a final section we will discuss evaluated DBs.

> New snapshot will be created in every `EndBlocker`. The `rootmulti.Store` keeps track of the version number and implements the `MultiStore` interface. `MultiStore` encapsulates a `Commiter` interface, which has the `Commit`, `SetPruning`, `GetPruning` functions which will be used for creating and removing snapshots. The `Store.Commit` function increments the version on each call, and checks if it needs to remove old versions. We will need to update the SMT interface to implement the `Commiter` interface.

Reviewer 8: Why is snapshot creation part of the state-machine process? Also, if you just take a direct DB snapshot, how do you perform verification?

Author: Because the App has a knowledge when to create a snapshot. Storage doesn't have that knowledge. We could assume that it can create a snapshot on each commit, but it will make the design more constrained, and the library less robust.

Reviewer 8: What about verification and the time it takes to create a snapshot?

NOTE: `Commit` must be called exactly once per block. Otherwise we risk going out of sync for the version number and block height.
NOTE: For the SDK storage, we may consider splitting that interface into `Committer` and `PrunningCommiter` - only the multiroot should implement `PrunningCommiter` (cache and prefix store don't need pruning).

Number of historical versions (snapshots) for `abci.Query` and fast sync is part of a node configuration, not a chain configuration (configuration implied by the blockchain consensus). A configuration should allow to specify number of past blocks and number of past blocks modulo some number (eg: 100 past blocks and one snapshot every 100 blocks for past 2000 blocks). Archival nodes can keep all snapshots.

> Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by a database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT will create a new one without removing the old one. Since we are snapshoting each block, we update the mechanism and immediately remove an orphaned from the storage. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records which should be available for past versions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by a database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT will create a new state commitment without removing the previoes commitment. Since we are snapshoting each block, we update the mechanism and immediately remove an orphan from the storage. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records which should be available for past versions.
```

what is mechanism and orphaned here? Writing the ADR for people to understand in the future as a form of documention is also important.

Author: yes, in fact in the text above, `one = record` (node).

### Rollbacks

We need to be able to process transactions and roll-back state updates if a transaction fails. This can be done in the following way: during transaction processing, we keep all state change requests (writes) in a `CacheWrapper` abstraction (as it's done today). Once we finish the block processing, in the `Endblocker`,  we commit a root store - at that time, all changes are written to the SMT and to the `SS` and a snapshot is created.

### Committing to an object without saving it

We identified use-cases, where modules will need to save an object commitment without storing an object itself. Sometimes clients are receiving complex objects, and they have no way to prove a correctness of that object without knowing the storage layout. For those use cases it would be easier to commit to the object without storing it directly.

## Consequences

### Backwards Compatibility

This ADR doesn't introduce any SDK level API changes.

We change the storage layout of the state machine, a storage migration and network upgrade is required to incorporate these changes.

> 

Reviewer 10: > a storage migration and network upgrade is required to incorporate these changes.

Is this changing key paths as well? 

Can you discuss backwards compatibility with respect to [ics23](https://github.com/confio/ics23/)? It sounds like SMT will be responsible maintaining compatibility? This is a little beyond my area of expertise but I guess my question is:
- will SMT support ICS 23 (or does it already)?
- will SMT require a different proof spec from the [existing one](https://github.com/confio/ics23/blob/53a3a58ab8d224eef792845a65c7e8fc66712b7d/go/proof.go#L27)?

I ask these questions, because changing how proofs are verified or the proof paths can possibly break IBC resulting in the best case an asynchronous network upgrade and in the worst case a synchronous network upgrade (all IBC chains need to synchronously upgrade to continue communication)

cc @AdityaSripal

Author: > Is this changing key paths as well?

Yes, it's essentially a hard fork.

> will SMT support ICS 23?

It's not done - it's in the scope of work we defined few weeks ago. I will clarify it here.

> will SMT require a different proof spec from the existing one?

No, it's a merkle tree after all.

Author: > proof paths can possibly break IBC

This sounds important. The proofs will change (because it will require a hard fork), however the verification will be the same. Shall we discuss the network upgrade mechanism in the ADR, or it's a separate discussion?
I think it should be following:
+ disable IBC
+ export chain
+ update binary and import genesis 
+ enable IBC

Reviewer 10: Thanks for the response. 

I'll defer to @AdityaSripal and @cwgoes to correct me, but I believe we need to consider the following cases:

IBC increases the complexity of upgrades because the counterparty needs to be informed of any changes in how the communication is being conducted. 

Lets say we send a packet and construct a packet commitment under the path K. Normally the counterparty light client can verify a proof of the packet commitment, P, at some block height (ie VerifyProof(K, P)). In the code, our packet commitment proof path looks like [this](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-go/blob/5b9e3c07f385fe1126c9a2ad89cc7e4f72664e42/modules/core/24-host/keys.go#L190), a store prefix is also added before performing verification of this path. Until given further notice (unsupported atm), the counterparty will continue to assume the packet commit will only ever exist under key path K.

If the key paths are changing, then lets say K' represents the key path after the hard fork and P' represents the proof after the hard fork. My understanding is that K != K' but that P may equal P' (if the same value was to be proved at the same height, but just with different proof paths). K' would always fail on counterparties which are incapable of knowing the key path should be K'

Lets say we do the hard fork at height X, ie height X we are on the current code, height X + 1 we use SMT. The problem is all our counterparties need to be aware that at height X + 1 all key paths should use the new format. Not only do they need to be aware of that, but they need to be capable of using the new key paths for any proof heights >= X + 1. If the upgrade can be somewhat asynchronous, then chains need to be capable of supporting the old and new proof paths. 

Re: disable/enable IBC

Unfortunately, there is no disabling/enabling IBC. We can disable/enable IBC transfers, but IBC itself is constantly moving forward. Clients may become expired if they are not successfully updated within a finite amount of time. This would result in funds essentially being "stuck". We do have recovery mechanisms, but ideally we coordinate a solution to avoid such a situation.

Currently, changing key paths/migrating IBC store is an unsupported upgrade, meaning existing IBC channels would be incapable of being used in the upgraded version. I believe it is entirely possible to add support for this, but we will need some time to specify the changes and implement/test them. In addition, all existing channels which cannot be lost between upgrades require all the counterparties to upgrade to the new IBC code which supports this upgrade route. Only then can the upgrade be performed without losing access to the channels. 

Re: proof spec changes

I believe ics23 is a generic merkle proofs which uses proof specs for specific merkle tree representation. Changing the proof specs is an easier upgrade mechanism (still requires some coordination) than the above (it is supported), but this is would only be needed if it changed things like the hash function

This is a lot of unpack in a github comment and I think it will require more coordination/clarification - maybe best done in a live call. The primary concern is if a proof key path used in the new code cannot be verified using the old code (and vice versa). This requires the most difficult IBC upgrade path, but there may be clever tricks we can do to alleviate the difficulty over a period of time, if we are aware this is something that should be addressed in the near future

Author: Thanks for comment @colin-axner . I think we should move this to the ADR-40 discussion page,  so let me answer it there: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/8297#discussioncomment-682443

TL;DR: we need to design a mechanism for IBC which will work support hard forks anyway. They are inevitable. 

In my opinion, this should not block ADR-40, for me this is related, but more general problem: how to handle hard forks. That being said - it will block a release - we need to have a general solution before doing any hard fork.

SMT is a merkle tree structure: we don't store keys directly. For every `(key, value)` pair, `hash(key)` is stored in a path (we hash a key to evenly distribute keys in the tree) and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf. Since we don't know a structure of a value (in particular if it contains the key) we hash both the key and the value in the `SC` leaf.

For data access we propose 2 additional KV buckets (namespaces for the key-value pairs, sometimes called [column family](https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Terminology)):
1. B1: `key → value`: the principal object storage, used by a state machine, behind the SDK `KVStore` interface: provides direct access by key and allows prefix iteration (KV DB backend must support it).
2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: SMT → B2 → B1) having only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.
3. we could use more buckets to optimize the app usage if needed.

Above, we propose to use a KV DB. However, for the state machine, we could use an RDBMS, which we discuss below.

### Requirements

State Storage requirements:
+ range queries
+ quick (key, value) access

> + creating a snapshot

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
+ historical versioning
```

Reviewer 11: Maybe this is the crux of the confusion for me. The DB feature which uses copy-on-write to produce views at specific point is what I would like refer to as versioning, and (I think) you are referring to as snapshots. This can be used to implement `SS` versioning as well as creation of ABCI snapshots.

But if snapshots and versioning are distinct features we want from the DB, I'm not sure which refers to what. If "versioning" means CoW-based views, then I would assume "snapshots" is more like a full backup or dump of the database; but I don't see why that's a desirable feature, since it won't be needed to implement `SS` versioning nor ABCI snapshots.

> + prunning (garbage collection)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
+ pruning (garbage collection)
```

State Commitment requirements:
+ fast updates
+ tree path should be short

> + creating a snapshot

Reviewer 11: Why is this a requirement for SC, if neither abci.Query nor sync snapshots will need past versions from it?

Author: Correct, Tendermint has instant finality and we don't have branches, so we don't need snapshots for `SC`. SMT can be rebuild from the storage data.

Author: This approach my not be valid any more if we decide to expose a low level API for `SC`: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/9451#issuecomment-859136155

Author: UPDATE: With low level interface, SMT can't be rebuild from SS :/

+ pruning (garbage collection)

### LazyLedger SMT for State Commitment

A Sparse Merkle tree is based on the idea of a complete Merkle tree of an intractable size. The assumption here is that as the size of the tree is intractable, there would only be a few leaf nodes with valid data blocks relative to the tree size, rendering the tree as sparse.

### Snapshots for storage sync and versioning

One of the Stargate core features are snapshots and state sync delivered in the `/snapshot` package. This feature is implemented in SDK and requires storage support. Currently IAVL is the only supported backend.

Database snapshot is a view of DB state at a certain time or transaction. It's not a full copy of a database (it would be too big), usually a snapshot mechanism is based on a _copy on write_ and it allows to efficiently deliver DB state at a certain stage.

> Some DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality for the state sync and versioning (described below). It will the supported DB engines to ones which efficiently implement snapshots. In a final section we will discuss evaluated DBs.

Author: I'm defining database snapshot here, so I prefer to use _snapshot_ mechanism here, so I prefer to keep the original language.

> Some DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality for the state sync and versioning (described below). It will the supported DB engines to ones which efficiently implement snapshots. In a final section we will discuss evaluated DBs.

Reviewer 11: Okay I may have misunderstood. This is what some DBs call snapshots, and distinct from state sync snapshots as used in the ABCI, right? (although it can be used to implement ABCI snapshots)

> Some DB engines support snapshotting. Hence, we propose to reuse that functionality for the state sync and versioning (described below). It will the supported DB engines to ones which efficiently implement snapshots. In a final section we will discuss evaluated DBs.

Author: Yes, here we are talking about a database engine mechanism.

NOTE: `Commit` must be called exactly once per block. Otherwise we risk going out of sync for the version number and block height.
NOTE: For the SDK storage, we may consider splitting that interface into `Committer` and `PrunningCommiter` - only the multiroot should implement `PrunningCommiter` (cache and prefix store don't need pruning).

Number of historical versions (snapshots) for `abci.Query` and fast sync is part of a node configuration, not a chain configuration (configuration implied by the blockchain consensus). A configuration should allow to specify number of past blocks and number of past blocks modulo some number (eg: 100 past blocks and one snapshot every 100 blocks for past 2000 blocks). Archival nodes can keep all snapshots.

Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by a database. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT won't update nodes - instead it create new nodes on the update path, without removing the old one. Since we are snapshoting each block, we need to update that mechanism to immediately remove orphaned nodes from the storage. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records which should be available for past versions.

> To manage the active snapshots we will either us a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or will remove snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height.

Author: In the previous section I use snapshot as a mechanism for SS versioning. It's better keep the same language. If you like I can add one more line here, eg: "As explained above, `SS` versioning is handled by a snapshot mechanism. Pruning old snapshots....".

> To manage the active snapshots we will either us a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or will remove snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height.

Reviewer 11: I think it would be useful to just clarify that _snapshot_ here does not refer to the state sync snapshots used over ABCI, and that different DBs will use a different term for that feature (e.g. Badger). Although this may only be confusing to people like me who are new to the codebase.

> To manage the active snapshots we will either us a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or will remove snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height.

Author: The whole section is called "Snapshots for storage sync and versioning". I will add one more line at the beginning to clarify it more:

> Below, with simple _snapshot_ we refer to a database snapshot mechanism, not to a _ABCI snapshot sync_. The latter will be referred as _snapshot sync_ (which will directly use DB snapshot as described below).

#### Accessing old state versions

> One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through `abci.Query` structure.  The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by a key `K` at block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.Query` is configurable. Accessing an old state is done by using available snapshots.

Author: same here - I prefer to be consistent and use snapshot.

### Negative

+ Storage migration
+ LL SMT doesn't support pruning - we will need to add and test that functionality.

### Neutral

+ Deprecating IAVL, which is one of the core proposals of Cosmos Whitepaper.

## Alternative designs.

Most of the alternative designs were evaluated in [state commitments and storage report](https://paper.dropbox.com/published/State-commitments-and-storage-review--BDvA1MLwRtOx55KRihJ5xxLbBw-KeEB7eOd11pNrZvVtqUgL3h).

Ethereum research published [Verkle Tire](https://notes.ethereum.org/_N1mutVERDKtqGIEYc-Flw#fnref1) - an idea of combining polynomial commitments with merkle tree in order to reduce the tree height. This concept has a very good potential, but we think it's too early to implement it. The current, SMT based design could be easily updated to the Verkle Tire once other research implement all necessary libraries. The main advantage of the design described in this ADR is the separation of state commitments from the data storage and designing a more powerful interface.

## Further Discussions

### Evaluated KV Databases

> We verified existing databases KV databases for evaluating snapshot support. The following databases provide efficient snapshot mechanism: Badger, RocksDB, [Pebble](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble). Databases which don't provide such support or are not production ready: boltdb, leveldb, goleveldb, membdb, lmdb.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
We verified existing databases KV databases for evaluating versioning support. The following databases provide an efficient versioning mechanism: Badger, RocksDB, [Pebble](https://github.com/cockroachdb/pebble). Databases which don't provide such support or are not production ready: boltdb, leveldb, goleveldb, membdb, lmdb.
```

Author: again we are talking about DB mechanism, not a SDK mechanism.

We propose separate the concerns of state commitment (**SC**), needed for consensus, and state storage (**SS**), needed for state machine. Finally we replace IAVL with [LazyLedger SMT](https://github.com/lazyledger/smt). LazyLedger SMT is based on Diem (called jellyfish) design [*] - it uses a compute-optimised SMT by replacing subtrees with only default values with a single node (same approach is used by Ethereum2 as  well).

> The storage model presented here doesn't deal with data structure nor serialization. It's a Key-Value database, where both key and value are binaries. The storage user is responsible about data serialization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The storage model presented here doesn't deal with data structure nor serialization. It's a Key-Value database, where both key and value are binaries. The storage user is responsible for data serialization.
```

### Decouple state commitment from storage

Separation of storage and commitment (by the SMT) will allow to optimize the different components according to their usage and access patterns.

SMT will use it's own storage (could use the same database underneath) from the state machine store. For every `(key, value)` pair, the SMT will store `hash(key)` in a path (needed to evenly distribute keys in the tree) and `hash(key, value)` in a leaf (to bind the (key, value) pair stored in the `SS`). Since we don't know a structure of a value (in particular if it contains the key) we hash both the key and the value in the `SC` leaf.

For data access we propose 2 additional KV buckets:
1. B1: `key → value`: the principal object storage, used by a state machine, behind the SDK `KVStore` interface: provides direct access by key and allows prefix iteration (KV DB backend must support it).

> 2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: SMT → B2 → B1) having a only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. B2: `hash(key, value) → key`: an index needed to extract a value (through: SMT → B2 → B1) having only a Merkle Path. Recall that SMT will store `hash(key, value)` in it's leafs.
```

Pruning old snapshots is effectively done by DB. Whenever we update a record in `SC`, SMT will create a new one without removing the old one. Since we are using a snapshot for each block, we must update the mechanism and immediately remove an orphaned from the storage. This is a safe operation - snapshots will keep track of the records which should be available for past versions.

To manage the active snapshots we will either us a DB _max number of snapshots_ option (if available), or will remove snapshots in the `EndBlocker`. The latter option can be done efficiently by identifying snapshots with block height.

#### Accessing old state versions

One of the functional requirements is to access old state. This is done through `abci.Query` structure.  The version is specified by a block height (so we query for an object by a key `K` at block height `H`). The number of old versions supported for `abci.Query` is configurable. Accessing an old state is done by using available snapshots.

> `abci.Query` doesn't need old state of `SC`. So, for efficiency, we should keep `SC` and `SS` in different databases (however using the same DB engine). We will only create snapshots for

Reviewer 3: Multiple database instances will compete for resources (CPU, memory, IO). IMHO without benchmarking, you can't say that this will be beneficial for efficiency.

Author: My thinking was that `SC` doesn't need to be part of the transactions - we don't need to keep old versions, as we need with  `SS` (State Store). If we don't separate this DB, then it will be hard to keep versioning for `SS` and not do it for `SC`. Does it make sense? If yes I will update the paragraph above.
